+++
date = "2015-05-19T22:26:14-07:00"
draft = true
tags = ['reflections']
title = "A matter of fact"
+++

Astronomy has an incredible history. Not that long ago humanity's greatest minds thought that the Earth was at the center of the universe. That was very, very wrong, but a reasonable assumption given the information we had available at the time. Now we've got a ton of new information and pretty much no one believes that any more. There have been a number of milestones along the way that clearly depict the evolution of knowledge about our universe, often requiring dramatic revisions to what we used to believe. That's kind of a beautiful thing.

I'm current in the middle of [The Pleasure of Finding Things Out](http://www.amazon.com/The-Pleasure-Finding-Things-Out/dp/0465023959) and have to say that Richard Feynman seems like an incredible guy. He was both a person of undoubtable intelligence and had the ability to break down complex topics to their essence and then frame that in a way that makes sense to the rest of us. To be both someone who is a leader in a number of advanced fields (and Nobel Prize winner) but also be able to communicate what you know to normals is really, really impressive.

Something that's interested me even more as the book's gone on is the way he distills down science itself and it's contributions (or the contributions he wished it'd have) to society. When he speaks of science in this context, it's usually the scientific attitude, not the actual career of being a scientist. For example, he has an incredible statement in there (that I don't have word for word) which refers to the two critical scientific underpinnings being *doubt* and *the ability to experience in order to understand the likelihood of something being true.* And that's where the daydreaming began...

I'm going to leave the book behind for a minute and think about things that we know to be true, where "know" is the operative word. *Knowing* that something is true is different than feeling that something is true or suspecting that something is true; knowing something is an extraordinarily rare circumstance  (see [Descartes](http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/phl302/texts/descartes/meditations/meditations.html) if you want to get formal about it). Almost every single thing we think, experience, or observe passes through all sorts of filters and biases, meaning that except for a very few examples a far more accurate way to describe something is "probably true" or "probably not true;" in addition we live in an exceeding complex environment there it's difficult to understand exactly why or how many things happen. It is sometimes feasible to establish that something *isn't* true because *disproving* something often only takes one example. Proving truth, on the other hand, can very often mean eliminating all possible alternative explanations, which is a really big task. Mathematical proofs, for example, pull that off, but the world of math is far cleaner and more constrained than the actual world.

All of that may sound relevant only from a philosophical perspective but one of the angles that came to mind immediately was the intersection of knowledge (meaning stuff we can observe repeatably) and belief (things we cannot). In my opinion, one of the biggest unfortunate gaps we have between our world and the world Feynman describes is the willingness among the general public to productively doubt; in other words, the willingness to recognize that the probability of something being correct is almost always less than 100%. I say *productively* here because it's easy to hate when you don't *like* something, but it's far more useful to actually gather evidence for the cause and try to learn something.

So how is it that knowledge and belief fit together? I'm still working through this in my own head but it's clearer than it used to be. Knowledge is what we use, on both a societal and personal level, to determine the probability of something being true. As we learn more, that probability can (and should!) change. Importantly that means that knowledge is not static; we are constantly gaining new knowledge and potentially replacing old knowledge once we know better. All that knowledge informs what we believe, and everything we believe is exactly that: a belief. Belief is how we get from that probability to something we can use. We need to make assumptions in order to progress; sometimes those assumptions are wrong and we need to fix them. That's where doubt comes in.

[ diagram ]

You have three choices when it comes to choosing what to believe:

* Believing that something is true.
* Believing that something is not true.
* Choosing to remain undecided.

The choice you make is likely based on two things: the confidence you have in the knowledge on the topic, and how bad it would be if you were wrong. If you're 80% sure you'll be on time when meeting someone for lunch (given what you know about how far it is and normal traffic patterns) and get caught in traffic, the penalty for that incorrect belief is usually fairly low so you're comfortable claiming you'll be on time with your 80% confidence. If we're talking about the existence of hell and eternal damnation, [many people would argue](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pascal%27s_Wager) that you want to be really, really sure of your knowledge before you risk it since the cost of that is substantially higher. Eternal, even.

### Productive doubt

But the thing that resonates most clearly for me out of all of this is the importance of doubt. Everything can be doubted, not only by experts but by anyone who's got knowledge or an experience to share that doesn't fit with conventional wisdom. The truth of the matter is that there are many things that we think we have a pretty good grip on (you know, like we did from the center of our universe centuries ago). There are, however, many *more* things where we need to gather much more knowledge in order to understand what's happening around us, which often requires doubting that conventional knowledge is bulletproof. I bet that's the mission that Feynman would give to all of us and I think it's a pretty great thing to aspire to. 