+++
date = "2015-03-02T22:37:11-08:00"
draft = true
tags = []
title = "Pick your battles"
+++

There are a lot of people who aren't good at handling disagreements; there are also some people who are remarkably good at it. In my opinion this is one of those dramatically undervalued skills that doesn't get the screen time that it deserves. I consider myself to be fairly good at it but I also find myself studying people who are much better at it, trying to pick up tools of the trade to get better. The best and most flexible tip I've come across thus far is simple to say, but much harder to practice: decide what you want the outcome to be before arguments start whenever you can. *Don't trust your frustrated brain to make the important decisions.* In many cases this will lead to avoiding senseless arguments altogether.

Let's start with a simple for-instance. If you've ever been in a relationship you've probably gotten into a least a minor scuffle with your significant other (if not, high five then think of a sibling, parent, or other person that you've spent a decent amount of time with). Really small things can turn into surprisingly big issues in a heartbeat. If you feel this starting to happen, it's decision time. Wander around or let your ego take over and you're going to be making it harder than it has to be on both of you. A few options come to mind for a circumstance like this, increasing in intensity:

1. **Ripple: let it go.** If you're bickering over a dirty plate or hair in the shower drain it's often worth letting it drop. Yes, seriously. No, I know it's gross, but just believe me when I say that sometimes it's not worth the ruffled feathers. In my experience, petty arguments rarely change behavior but do regularly irriate. If you're looking for something to get up in arms about then there's [no shortage of real problems](http://www.un.org/en/globalissues/), and often the stress of lots of small issues can cause more strain than it fixes by mentioning them. Often this is a good strategy if you suspect that the issue being debated has no significance outside of the current conversation. The goal for this strategy is to drop the conversation as quickly as possible to avoid unnecessary drama.
2. **Splash: argue for sport.** Not all vebal conflict is bad, and some people like it. A heated debate, for example, can be really interesting for everyone involved, but you run the risk of irritating your partner or accidentally escalating to one of the more seroious options. Nevertheless if you can keep the discussion at the right level (some assembly required) then this can be the home of some of the best and most enlightening conversations. The goal with this strategy is to have that (sometimes) heated discussion with none of the other goals in mind.
3. **Wave: the sales pitch.** Sometimes you have an opinion that you come in willing to fight for but are willing (or become willing) to be convinced otherwise. This is where a lot of my work conversations come in, as well as conversations about things that I regularly do during my free time. The goal of this strategy is usually to arrive at a 
4. **Typhoon: die at the cross.** Sometimes it's important that you drive a discussion to a single outcome, and that's when this strategy comes in handy. Note that if you do this more than occasionally then you're probably frustrating people on a regular basis. The goal of this strategy is to fight until there's no one left to oppose you.

Call me crazy but I personally dislike needless drama and find it very easy to classify most things as ripples and let them go. When I do hit an issue that I care more about, it's important to act with the goal in mind. Do you need to actually accomplish something with the conversation? If so, is it what the conversation is actually focused on (washing that plate) or is it related to a potential side-effect of the conversation (preserving the strength of your relationship)? Which is more important, and are your actions aligned with what you want to achieve?

The first time I heard this tip was in a book many years ago and it sounded obvious when I read it. I've tried to follow it more explicitly over the past few years and I've been shocked by how much more directed and productive my social speed bumps have been.